>> Woodruff: REPUBLICAN LEADERS
OUTLINE THEIR AGENDA FOR THE NEW
CONGRESS, FROM AUTHORIZING THE
KEYSTONE X.L. PIPELINE TO
REVISING THE AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS THURSDAY, THE
U.S. EXPANDS AIRSTRIKES IN SYRIA
TO TARGET REBEL GROUPS OTHER
THAN THE ISLAMIC STATE.
>> Woodruff: A DECADE AFTER A
DEADLY TSUNAMI DEVASTATED THE
COASTS OF INDONESIA HOW ONE
COMMUNITY RECOVERS ONCE THEIR
WORLD WAS WASHED AY.AW
>> Ifill: PLUS, A RENOWNED
BALLERINA LIFTS UP A NEW
GENERATION OF DANCERS.
>> BEING A DANCER IS EASY
BECAUSE YOU JUST HAVE YOURSELF
TO THINK ABOUT AND WHEN YOU'RE A
TEACHER YOU HAVE SO MANY
CONCERNS FOR YOUR STUDENTS.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: REPUBLICANS WHO WILL
RUN THE NEXT CONGRESS TALKED UP
THEIR TO-DO LIST TODAY.
HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER ALSO
ISSUED A WARNING TO PRESIDENT
OBAMA ESPECIALLY ON IMMIGRATION.
>> THERE IS A BIPARTISAN
MAJORITY IN THE HOUSE AND SENATE
TO TAKE SOME OF THESE ISSUES OUT
OF OBAMACARE.
WE NEED TO PUT THEM ON THE
PRESIDENT'S DESK AND LET HIM
CHOOSE.
>> Ifill: WE'LL HAVE MORE ON
TODAY'S EVENTS, AND ANOTHER LOOK
AT WHAT'S BEHIND THE ELECTION
RESULTS AFTER THE NEWS SUMMARY.
OHIO, KENTUCKY, MICHIGAN AND
TENNESSEE.
THAT CONFLICTS WITH RULINGS BY
OTHER APPEALS PANELS, MAKING IT
MORE LIKELY THE HIGH COURT WILL
HAVE TO ISSUE A DEFINITIVE
DECISION.
THERE'S WORD TODAY THAT
PRESIDENT OBAMA WROTE LAST MONTH
TO IRAN'S SUPREME LEADER,
AYATOLLAH KHAMENEI, ABOUT THE
FIGHT AGAINST ISLAMIC STATE
MILITANTS.
"THE WALL STREET JOURNAL"
REPORTS THE LETTER DESCRIBED
IRAN'S SHARED INTEREST IN
BATTLING THE MILITANTS IN IRAQ
AND SYRIA.
THE WHITE HOUSE DECLINED TO
DISCUSS THE CORRESPONDENCE,
EXCEPT TO SAY AGAIN THERE WILL
BE NO MILITARY COOPERATION WITH
IRAN.
>> Ifill: ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU TRIED TODAY
TO QUELL A CONFLICT AROUND
JERUSALEM'S HOLIEST SITE.
IT'S KNOWN TO JEWS AS THE TEMPLE
MOUNT AND TO MUSLIMS AS THE
NOBLE SANCTUARY.
THERE'S NEW UNREST AS JEWISH
ACTIVISTS DEMAND GREATER ACCESS.
BUT TODAY, NETANYAHU SAID HE
TELEPHONED THE KING OF JORDAN,
WHO TECHNICALLY HAS CUSTODY OF
THE SITE.
>> I EXPLAINED TO HIM THAT WE'LL
KEEP THE STATUS QUO ON THE
TEMPLE MOUNT, AND THAT THIS
INCLUDES JORDAN'S TRADITIONAL
ROLE THERE AS CONSISTENT WITH
THE PEACE TREATY BETWEEN ISRAEL
AND JORDAN, WE HAVE TO MAKE
EVERY EFFORT TO RESTORE CALM,
QUIET AND SECURITY.
>> Ifill: THE TENSIONS OVER THE
SITE HAVE LED TO CLASHES THERE
AND ELSEWHERE.
THERE HAVE ALSO BEEN SEVERAL
INCIDENTS OF PALESTINIANS
DRIVING VEHICLES INTO GROUPS OF
ISRAELIS IN JERUSALEM.
>> Woodruff: LIBYA'S HIGH COURT
HANDED ISLAMIST MILITANTS A
VICTORY TODAY AND DEEPENED THE
COUNTRY'S POLITICAL TURMOIL.
THE COURT DECLARED THAT
ELECTIONS HELD IN JUNE WERE
UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
IT SAID THE NEW PARLIAMENT AND
GOVERNMENT THAT'S BEEN FIGHTING
THE ISLAMISTS SHOULD BE
DISSOLVED.
THE RULING WAS HANDED DOWN IN
TRIPOLI, WHERE THE MILITANTS ARE
IN CONTROL.
>> Ifill: ONE OF THE LONGEST-
HELD TERROR DETAINEES AT
GUANTANAMO BAY IS BACK IN HIS
HOME COUNTRY.
FAWZI AL-ODAH ARRIVED IN KUWAIT
EARLY TODAY.
HE'D BEEN AT GUANTANAMO SINCE
2002.
LAST JULY, A REVIEW FOUND AL-
ODAH MAY HAVE FOUGHT AGAINST THE
U.S. IN AFGHANISTAN BUT HE HAD
ONLY LOW-LEVEL TRAINING AND WAS
NOT IN A LEADERSHIP POSITION.
148 PRISONERS REMAIN AT
GUANTANAMO.
A RETIRED NAVY SEAL CAMEED FOR
TO SAY HE FIRED THE SHOT THAT
KILLED OSAMA BIN LADEN.
HE SPOKE OUT BECAUSE HIS
IDENTITY WAS BEING LEAKED
ANYWAY.
O'NEILL CDGES AT LEAST TWO OTHER
SEALs ALSO FIRED SHOTS DURING
THE RAID AT THE PAKISTAN HOME IN
2011.
>> Ifill: A CLOSE ADVISER OF
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN
IS NOW THE TARGET OF A U.S.
INVESTIGATION INVOLVING MONEY
LAUNDERING.
"THE WALL STREET JOURNAL"
REPORTS RUSSIAN BILLIONAIRE
GENNADY TIMCHENKO IS SUSPECTED
OF USING THE AMERICAN FINANCIAL
SYSTEM TO WASH MONEY FROM
CORRUPT DEALS IN RUSSIA.
THE KREMLIN TODAY CONDEMNED NEWS
OF THE FEDERAL INVESTIGATION.
A SPOKESMAN CHARGED IT'S REALLY
AIMED AT PUTIN HIMSELF.
>> Woodruff: THE LOS ANGELES
COUNTY MUSEUM OF ART ANNOUNCED
ITS LARGEST-EVER DONATION OF
ARTWORK TODAY.
JERRY PERENCHIO, THE FORMER
C.E.O. OF THE SPANISH LANGUAGE
NETWORK UNIVISION PLEDGED TO
DONATE 47 PIECES.
THEY INCLUDE MASTERWORKS BY
PABLO PICASSO, CLAUDE MONET, AND
EDGAR DEGAS.
THE BEQUEST WILL TAKE PLACE
AFTER THE 83-YEAR-OLD
BILLIONAIRE'S DEATH.
>> Ifill: A UNION ARMY OFFICER
IN THE CIVIL WAR HAS FINALLY
RECEIVED THE MEDAL OF HONOR 151
YEARS AFTER HE DIED AT
GETTYSBURG.
PRESIDENT OBAMA TODAY HONORED
FIRST LIEUTENANT ALONZO LON
CUSHING OF WISCONSIN.
IN JULY 1863, HE COMMANDED A
SMALL FORCE THAT HELPED BREAK
THE CONFEDERATE ASSAULT KNOWN AS
PICKETT'S CHARGE.
CUSHING WAS WOUNDED REPEATEDLY,
BUT REFUSED TO LEAVE THE BATTLE.
>> LON ORDERED HIS MEN TO
CONTINUE FIRING AT THE ADVANCING
COLUMNS.
HE USED HIS OWN THUMB TO STOP
HIS GUN'S VENT, BURNING HIS
FINGERS TO THE BONE.
WHEN HE WAS HIT THE FINAL TIME,
AS A POET LATER WROTE, HIS GUN
SPOKE OUT FOR HIM ONCE MORE
BEFORE HE FELL TO THE GROUND.
AND ALONZO CUSHING WAS JUST 22-
YEARS-OLD.
>> Ifill: THE ACCOUNT OF
CUSHING'S BRAVERY WAS LOST IN
THE CHAOS AFTER THE BATTLE.
MORE THAN A CENTURY LATER, A
HISTORIAN IN WISCONSIN
REDISCOVERED HIS STORY, BUT IT
TOOK YEARS OF RESEARCH AND
LETTERS BEFORE CONGRESS AWARDED
THE MEDAL.
>> Woodruff: ON WALL STREET
TODAY, UPBEAT ECONOMIC REPORTS
HELPED LIFT THE DOW AND THE S&P
TO RECORD HIGHS.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED NEARLY 70 POINTS TO CLOSE
AT 17,554; THE NASDAQ ROSE MORE
THAN 17 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
4,638; AND THE S&P 500 ADDED
SEVEN POINTS TO CLOSE AT 2,031.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR.
BREAKING DOWN THE NUMBERS ON
VOTER TURNOUT IN KEY RACES FROM
THE MIDTERM ELECTIONS.
U.S. AIRSTRIKES TARGET REBELS IN
SYRIA OUTSIDE THE ISLAMIC STATE
GROUP.
REBUILDING INDONESIA'S CITIES TO
WITHSTAND FORCEFUL TSUNAMIS.
MAKING YES MEANS YES THE
STANDARD TO STOP SEXUAL ASSUALTS
ON COLLEGE CAMPUSES.
WHY EBOLA TREATMENT IN THE U.S.
SAVES MORE LIVES THAN TREATMENT
IN WEST AFRICA.
AND HONORING BALLERINA PATRICIA
McBRIDE'S CAREER AS A DANCER AND
COACH.
>> Ifill: THE POLITICAL
EARTHQUAKE FROM TUESDAY'S
ELECTIONS CONTINUES TO
REVERBERATE.
TODAY, IT MADE ITS WAY TO
CAPITOL HILL WHERE THERE WERE
NEW QUESTIONS ABOUT WHETHER THE
PRESIDENT AND THE SOON TO BE
REPUBLICAN CONGRESS CAN REALLY
GET ANYTHING DONE.
>> MY JOB IS NOT TO GET ALONG
WITH THE PRESIDENT JUST TO GET
ALONG WITH HIM.
ALTHOUGH WE ACTUALLY HAVE A NICE
RELATIONSHIP.
THE FACT IS MY JOB IS TO LISTEN
TO MY MEMBERS AND LISTEN TO THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE AND MAKE THEIR
PRIORITIES OUR PRIORITIES.
>> Ifill: A DAY AFTER THE POST-
ELECTION PROMISES OF
COOPERATION, SIGNS OF SHARPER
EDGES WERE BEGINNING TO SHOW.
WRITING IN THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL," HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN
BOEHNER AND MITCH McCONNELL, THE
NEXT SENATE MAJORITY LEADER
OUTLINED THEIR OBJECTIVES FOR
THE NEW CONGRESS.
AMONG THEM, AUTHORIZE THE
KEYSTONE X.L. PIPELINE, OVERHAUL
THE TAX CODE, REVISE OR REPEAL
THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT, AND
REIN IN THE FEDERAL DEBT.
THERE WAS NO MENTION OF
IMMIGRATION REFORM EVEN THOUGH
PRESIDENT OBAMA THREATENED
YESTERDAY TO ACT ON HIS OWN BY
YEAR'S END.
>> IF THEY WANT TO GET A BILL
DONE, WHETHER IT'S DURING THE
LAME DUCK OR NEXT YEAR, I'M
EAGER TO SEE WHAT THEY HAVE TO
OFFER.
BUT WHAT I'M NOT GOING TO DO IS
JUST WAIT.
>> Ifill: McCONNELL HAD WARNED
THAT'S LIKE WAVING A RED FLAG AT
A BULL.
BOEHNER CHOSE HIS OWN METAPHORS
TODAY TO MAKE THE SAME POINT.
>> I BELIEVE THAT IF THE
PRESIDENT CONTINUES TO ACT ON
HIS OWN, HE IS GOING TO POISON
THE WELL.
WHEN YOU PLAY WITH MATCHES, YOU
TAKE THE RISK OF BURNING
YOURSELF.
AND HE'S GOING TO BURN HIMSELF
IF HE CONTINUES TO GO DOWN THIS
PATH.
>> Ifill: AS FOR KEYSTONE, WHITE
HOUSE SPOKESMAN JOSH EARNEST
SAID THE PRESIDENT WILL CONSIDER
ANY BILL CONGRESS SENDS HIM
PENDING A COURT RULING.
>> THAT'S A PROCESS THAT
CURRENTLY IS WINDING ITS WAYS
THROUGH THE STATE DEPARTMENT AND
ONE THAT RIGHT NOW IS AT LEAST
GOING TO BE INFLUENCED BY THE
DECISION FROM A NEBRASKA JUDGE
ABOUT THE PROPER ROUTE FOR THAT
PIPELINE THROUGH THAT STATE.
>> Ifill: THE PRESIDENT HAS
CALLED CONGRESSIONAL LEADERS TO
THE WHITE HOUSE TOMORROW, TO
DISCUSS THOSE ISSUES AND OTHERS
DIRECTLY.
AS THE WHITE HOUSE AND
CONGRESSIONAL LEADERS RETREAT TO
THEIR CORNERS, WE THOUGHT IT
MIGHT BE WORTH TAKING ONE MORE
LOOK AT WHO VOTED, WHAT THEY
THOUGHT THEY WERE VOTING FOR AND
WHETHER THE POLITICIANS HEARD.
DAVID WINSTON IS PRESIDENT OF
THE WINSTON GROUP, A REPUBLICAN
POLLING FIRM.
OVER THE YEARS, HE HAS ADVISED
REPUBLICAN CONGRESSIONAL
LEADERSHIP.
FRED YANG IS A PARTNER AT THE
GARIN HART YANG RESEARCH GROUP,
A DEMOCRATIC POLLING FIRM.
EXAMINE FOR US, GENTLEMEN, THE
2014 ELECTORATE, AND TELL ME
WHAT STANDS OUT FOR YOU.
>> WELL, I MEAN, FIRST OFF, IT
WAS A VERY TRADITIONAL OFF-YEAR
ELECTORATE.
WHAT THAT MEANS IS YOUNGER
VOTERS DID NOT PARTICIPATE IN
THE SAME LEVEL THEY NORMALLY DO
IN PRESIDENTIAL YEARS.
THERE WASN'T THAT MUCH OF A
DROP-OFF IN TERMS OF MINORITY
VOTE THAT WAS EXPECTED.
AFRICAN AMERICANS DROPPED OFF BY
ONE FROM AN ON YEAR TO AN OFF
YEAR AND THE SPANISH DROPPED OFF
BY TWO, BUT THIS WAS IN MANY
WAYS A TYPICAL OFF-YEAR
ELEXERATE.
>> Ifill: ANTIDEMOCRATIC OR
WASHINGTON.
>> IT'S HARD TO ARGUE GIVEN WHAT
HAPPENED ON TUESDAY THERE WASN'T
SOME ANTI-DEMOCRAT VOTING BUT I
THINK IT WAS ULTIMATELY
ANTI-WASHINGTON, AND AN
ELECTORATE THAT HAD RUN OUT OF
PATIENCE WITH WHAT THEY PERCEIVE
IS THE STATUS QUO, AND SINCE THE
DEMOCRATS HAVE THE WHITE HOUSE,
WE WERE THE STATUS QUO.
>> Ifill: THIS WAS, EVERYBODY
AGREES, AN OLDER, WHITER, MORE
MALE ELECTORATE, AT LEAST THE
REPUBLICAN ELECTORATE WAS, AND
WE HAVE THREE EXAMPLES TO SHOW
YOU THAT WOULD DEMONSTRATE THAT.
ONE IS NATIONALLY.
NATIONALLY WE DISCOVERED WHITE
MALE REPUBLICANS WERE UP IN 2012
TO 64% FROM 62%, NOT A BIG
NUMBER.
BUT LOOK AT THE STATE OF GEORGIA
WHERE DAVID PURDURING THE
SENATOR-ELECT, GOT 79% OF THE
WHITE MALE VOTE, THE REPUBLICAN
THERE.
AND IN MICHIGAN, WHITE MALE
REPUBLICANS HAD GROWN FIVE
POINTS SINCE 2012 FROM 58% TO
63%.
SO DOES THAT MEAN THAT THE--
WE'VE TALKED A LOT ON ELECTION
NIGHT ABOUT THE DAEFGHT OBAMA
COALITION.
DOES THAT MEAN THERE SHOULD BE
MORE FOCUS ON WOOING BACK WHITE
MALES?
>> I THINK THE CHALLENGE TO
DEMOCRATS AT THIS POINT AFTER
SEEING THEIR COALITION FALL
APART IS NOT NECESSARILY TO
START GOING CHERRY PICKING
GROUPS.
IT'S THINKING THROUGH THE
PROCESS OF WHAT DAY NEW MAJORITY
COALITION LOOK LIKE IF THE
DEMOCRATS ARE GOING TO TRY TO
ACHIEVE IT.
I THINK ON THE REPUBLICAN SIDE,
WE GOT THERE.
WE WERE CERTAINLY ABLE TO EXPAND
IN TERMS OF HISPANIC VOTERS.
WE WENT FROM 29% TO 36%.
WE DID BETTER WITH WOMEN THIS
TIME.
WE DID SLIGHTLY BETTER WITH
YOUNGER VOTERS AS WELL, SO WE
WERE ABLE TO GROW THAT
COALITION.
I THINK THE CHALLENGE TO
DEMOCRATS AT THIS POINT IS WHAT
DOES THE NEW COALITION LOOK
LIKE?
IT MAY INCLUDE THAT DEMOGRAPHIC
OR IT MAY NOT, BUT I THINK
THAT'S THE CHALLENGE.
>> Ifill: THAT'S WHAT THE
REPUBLICAN TELLS A DEMOCRAT, SO
YOU GET TO TELL HIM AS WELL.
>> I'M TAKING NOTES.
THERE IS AN OBAMA COALITION.
IT APPEARS-- AND IN SOME
RESPECTS, ALSO, DAVID, IT IS A
PRESIDENTIAL TURNOUT COALITION.
>> AGREED.
>> AND THE CHALLENGE FOR
DEMOCRATS NOT JUST BASED ON
TUESDAY BUT IN 2016, PRESIDENT
OBAMA WON'T BE ON THE BALLOT.
AND SORT OF CAN WE BUILD ON THE
OBAMA COALITION?
CAN WE MAKE SURE UNMARRIED
WOMEN, SINGLE WOMEN, MINORITIES,
YOUNG VOTERS, ONE OF THE
INTERESTING STATISTICS FROM THE
EXIT POLLS WAS IN PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTIONS, UNDER AGE 30 VOTERS S
ARE A BIGGER SHARE THAN OVER AGE
65.
ON TUESDAY NIGHT, TWO TO ONE
AGED 65 OVER YOUNGER VOTERS.
SO CAN WE SUSTAIN OUR MOMENTUM
WITH YOUNGER VOTERS?
LOOK, ULTIMATELY, THE DEMOCRATS,
LIKE THE REPUBLICANS, ARE A
NATIONAL PARTY.
AND I THINK THAT AS PART OF THE
POSTELECTION DEBRIEFING, I THINK
WE AS A PARTY NEED HAVE,OB,
MESSAGES AND PRIORITIES THAT
RESONATE WITH THE ENTIRE
ELECTORATE, INCLUDING WHITE
VOTER DISPLE YOU'RE TALKING
ABOUT PRIORITYS.
BOTH THE PRESIDENT AND MITCH
McCONNELL AND TO SOME EXTENT
JOHN BOEHNER SAID AMERICA WANTS
US TO GET STUFF DONE.
THOSE WERE THE PRESIDENT'S
WORDS.
DOES IT MATTER WHAT STUFF OR IS
IT JUST GETTING SOMETHING DONE.
>> THE ELECTORATE WASN'T SAYING
HERE ARE THE 17 THINGS WE WANT
DONE.
THEY JUST RAN OUT OF PATIENCE
WITH THE PRESIDENT AND TURNED TO
REPUBLICANS AND SAID YOU GUYS.
WE'RE GOING TO GIVE YOU THE
CHANCE TO GOVERN.
THIS IS YOUR OPPORTUNITY TO DO
IT.
AND THE ONE THING THEY WANT DONE
IS ECONOMY AND JOBS.
THIS IS NOT A SITUATION WHERE
THERE ARE SEVEN THINGS THAT ARE
GOING TO OCCUR.
THEY WANT KIND OF A RESET, AND
THAT MEANS, BY THE WAY, THE
PRESIDENT'S GOT TO RESET, AS
WELL.
AND I THINK YOU HEARD, READING
THE PIECE THAT McCONNELL AND
BOEHNER DID IN THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL," THEY'RE RESETTING AS.
WEAPON YOU'RE RIGHTYOU'RE RIGHTT
STUFF DONE.
>> AND I THINK IT WOULD BE A
MISTAKE TO READ THE MANDATE AS
SOME KIND OF ECONOMIC AGENDA.
I DO AGREE WITH DAVID IT WAS A
MANDATE FOR IMPATIENCE, THAT WE
SORT OF NEED TO GET THINGS
MOVING.
I THINK THE ONE OPPORTUNITY,
AMONG MANY, FORE DEMOCRATS IS I
DON'T THINK THE REPUBLICAN PARTY
ARTICULATED A POSITIVE AGENDA.
IT WAS ANTI-OBAMA, ANTI-THIS,
AND I DO THINK THERE'S A CHANCE
FOR DEMOCRATS TO SEIZE ON THE
ECONOMIC NARRATIVE.
>> Ifill: ARE WE A
CENTER-RIGHT COUNTRY, BASED ON
THOSE RESULTS OR IS THAT JUST
WHERE WE ARE TODAY?
>> WE HAVE BEEN A CENTER-RIGHT
COUNTRY FOR A WHILE.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE EXIT POLLS,
MODERATES ARE THE LARGEST GROUP
AND THEY'RE MORE CONSERVATIVE
THAN LIBERALS SO CENTER-RIGHT.
BUT UNDERSTANDING WHERE THAT
CENTER GOES POLITICALLY AND
EOLOIDGICAL, SETS UP THE FRIEM
FOR HOW YOU BUILD YOUR MAJORITY
COALITION.
>> I AGREE WITH THAT.
>> Ifill: YOU AGREE WITH THAT?
>> PEOPLE EXPECT POLLSTERS FROM
DIFFERENT PARTIES TO DISAGREE,
BUT THE NUMBERS ARE THE NUMBERS.
AND, LOOK, I THINK ON TUESDAY
NIGHT, THE COUNTRY MIGHT HAVE
SHIFTED CENTER-RIGHT.
I THINK 2016 IS A WHOLE NEW
BALLGAME WITH A DIFFERENT
ELECTORATE.
>> Ifill: WELL, 2016 IS IT
GOING TO BE RIGHT ON OUR HEELS
ANY MOMENT NOW.
WE'LL BE BACK TO TALK TO YOU
ABOUT THAT AS WELL.
FRED YANG, DAVID NSTOWIN, THANK
YOU BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> PLEASURE.
>> Woodruff: U.S. AIR CAMPAIGN
INSIDE SYRIA BROADENED AGAIN
LAST NIGHT GOING BEYOND THE
TARGETING OF THE ISLAMIC STATE
GROUP.
TONIGHT, WE TAKE A CLOSER LOOK
AT THE SHIFTING DYNAMICS ON THE
GROUND IN THE WAR-TORN NATION.
THIS VIDEO, POSTED BY SYRIAN
ACTIVISTS, PURPORTS TO SHOW THE
AFTERMATH OF U.S. AIR STRIKES
NEAR ALEPPO OVERNIGHT.
TARGETS INCLUDED THE AL-NUSRA
FRONT, AL-QAEDA'S SYRIAN PROXY,
AND THE SO-CALLED KHORASAN
GROUP, SAID TO INCLUDE AL-NUSRA
ELEMENTS.
OVER THE WEEKEND, NUSRA FRONT
FIGHTERS ROUTED TWO U.S.-BACKED
REBEL GROUPS IN NEIGHBORING
IDLIB PROVINCE, AND SEIZED A
MAJOR WEAPONS CACHE.
ON THE OTHER HAND, NUSRA HAS
ALSO OFTEN ALLIED ITSELF WITH
SO-CALLED MODERATE REBELS
AGAINST THE BASHAR AL-ASSAD
REGIME.
NUSRA AND THE ISLAMIC STATE
GROUP SPLIT WITH EACH OTHER IN
FEBRUARY OVER TACTICS.
THE WEEKEND LOSSES WERE A BLOW
TO WASHINGTON'S EFFORT TO BUILD
UP THOSE REBELS.
AT THE WHITE HOUSE YESTERDAY,
PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID THE U.S.
AND ITS ALLIES MUST TREAD
CAREFULLY IN THE SYRIAN MAZE, TO
FIND SOMEONE WHO WILL
BATTLE THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP.
>> THERE ARE A LOT OF OPPOSITION
GROUPS IN SYRIA, THEY FIGHT
AMONG EACH OTHER, THEY ARE
FIGHTING THE REGIME.
AND WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO DO IS
TO FIND A CORE GROUP THAT WE CAN
WORK WITH THAT WE HAVE
CONFIDENCE IN.
>> Woodruff: INDEED, THE
DIZZYING ARRAY OF GROUPS
FIGHTING IN SYRIA, INCLUDES:
THE SYRIAN ARMY OF BASHAR AL-
ASSAD; THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP;
THE AL-NUSRA FRONT.
IN ADDITION, THERE ARE KURDISH
MILITIA, AND THE FREE SYRIAN
ARMY, OR F.S.A., AMONG OTHERS.
THEY CONTROL DIFFERENT PARTS OF
SYRIA.
THE REGIME HOLDS SWAY IN THE
WESTERN-CENTRAL REGIONS, PARTS
OF DAMASCUS AND ALEPPO, AND THE
COAST.
ISLAMIC STATE HOLDS A BAND
ACROSS NORTHERN AND EASTERN
SYRIA, TOWARD IRAQ.
AL-NUSRA IS STRONG ALONG THE
SOUTHERN BORDER NEAR ISRAEL AND
IN THE NORTHWEST.
AND THE KURDS HOLD TERRITORY
ALONG THE BORDER WITH TURKEY.
OTHER GROUPS AND THE F.S.A. ARE
STRONGEST IN THE SOUTH.
THE FREE SYRIAN ARMY AND ITS
ALLIES STILL HOLD AREAS IN THE
NORTH, INCLUDING A VITAL
CROSSING INTO TURKEY CALLED BAB
AL-HAWA.
VITAL AID PASSES THROUGH HERE--
A LIFELINE TO REBELS AND TO
THOUSANDS OF INTERNALLY-
DISPLACED SYRIANS.
NOW, AL-NUSRA FORCES ARE CLOSING
IN ON THE BORDER CROSSING, AS
ALLIANCES ONCE AGAIN SHUFFLE.
BUT THE U.S. CENTRAL COMMAND WAS
CAREFUL TO SAY IT DID NOT TARGET
THE NUSRA FRONT AS A WHOLE.
THAT'S BECAUSE IN THE SYRIAN
WAR, THE GROUP HAS SOMETIMES
ALLIED WITH AMERICAN-SUPPORTED
FACTIONS AGAINST THE SYRIAN
GOVERNMENT.
AND ANDREW TABLER A SENIOR
FELLOW AT THE WASHINGTON
INSTITUTE FOR NEAR EAST POLICY.
WELCOME BOTH OF YOU BACK TO THE
PROGRAM.
ANDREW TABLER, LET ME START WITH
YOU.
THIS IS ALMOST AN ALPHABET-LIKE
COLLECTION OF GROUPS IN SURYOO
SO I'M GOING TO KEEP IT SIMPLE
FOR MY OWN SAKE.
HOW SIGNIFICANT IS THIS LATEST
NEWS THAT AL-NUSRA HAS ROUTED
THE FREE SYRIAN ARMY, WHICH THE
U.S., AT LEAST IN PART, HAS BEEN
SUPPORTING?
>> I THINK IT'S SIGNIFICANT IN
THAT IT'S ROUTED TWO PRIMARY
GROUPS IN THE FREE SYRIAN ARMY,
BOTH OF WHICH THE UNITED STATES
HAD SUPPORTED IN A COVERT
PROGRAM.
IT'S A SETBACK FOR THE MODERATE
REBELS.
THERE ARE MODERATE REBELS
ELSEWHERE IN THE COUNTRY, SO
THEY'RE DOWN BUT CERTAINLY NOT
OUT.
I THINK THE BIGGER QUESTION IS
WHAT THE IMPLICATIONS OF THIS
ALL ARE FOR A DIFFERENT PROGRAM
PROPOSED BY THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION, AND THAT IS THE
TRAIN AND EQUIP PROGRAM THAT HAS
BEEN EARMARKED AND IS GOING
AHEAD THAT WILL BE ORGANIZED IN
NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES.
>> Woodruff: THE SAME QUESTION
TO YOU, JOSHUA LANDIS, FIRST OF
ALL, HOW SIGNIFICANT DO YOU SEE
THIS DEVELOPMENT THAT AL-NUSRA
IS GAINING IN PARTS OF SYRIA
THAT THE U.S. CONSIDERS
STRATEGIC?
>> IT UNDERLINES HOW DIFFICULT
THE U.S. IS GOING TO FIND TRYING
TO FIND PARTNERS IN SYRIA ALL
TOGETHER.
OUR PARTNERS ARE NOT POPULAR IN
SYRIA.
TODAY, THE BROAD SENTIMENTS
AMONGST SUNNI ARABS WHO SUPPORT
THE REBELLION IS THAT THE THE
UNITED STATES IS TRYING TO FIND
HIRED HANDS, AND MOST SYRIANS
DON'T LIKE THEM.
WE'RE BOMBING NUSRA-- THIS IS
THE AL QAEDA GROUPS-- AND WE'VE
KILLED A NUMBER OF PEOPLE WITH
THE ISLAMIC FRONT WHO ARE
APPLIED LYDE WITH THEM, A VERY
POPULAR, BROADBASED GROUP.
IN THE GENERAL SENTIMENT, I
THINK SO, AMONGST THE REBELS IS
TO TURNING AGAINST THE UNITED
STATES, BELIEVE THE UNITED
STATES IS HELPING ASSAD, AND
THIS IS GOING TO MAKE LIFE VERY
DIFFICULT IN TRYING TO PRODUCE A
SYRIAN ARMY THAT'S GOING TO HAVE
ANY EFFECT ON THE REAL BALANCE
OF POWER ON THE GROUND.
AND WE'VE ONLY SPENT-- WE'VE
ONLY EARMARKED HALF A BILLION
DOLLARS.
THAT'S ABOUT A THIRD OF THE
ENDOWMENT OF THE UNIVERSITY OF
OKLAHOMA.
>> Woodruff: HE RAISES THE
QUESTION HOW DOES THIS AFFECT
WHAT THE U.S. IS TRYING TO
ACCOMPLISH?
>> SURE.
THE GOAL OF TRAINING AND
EQUIPPING THE OPPOSITION
CONTINUES AND WILL GOED FOR.
THE OVERALL ALLEGATIONS WILL
DEPEND, THE INITIAL ALLOCATIONS
TO TRAIN 5,000, THAT COULD BE
RAPIDLY INCREASED.
THE PROBLEM REMAINS WHAT ARE THE
FORCES THAT WILL TAKE CARE OF
THE JIHADISTS SPREADING INSIDE
OF SYRIA.
THE REGIME ISN'T THE SOLUTION.
THAT'S THE REASON FOR THE TRAIN
AND EQUIP PROGRAM AND FINDING
ALLIES I THINK WOULD BE HARD FER
ALL SYRIANS STILL LIVED INSIDE
OF SYRIA.
BUT HALF OF SYRIAN SYRIANS ARE Y
OUTSIDE OR IN THE BORDER AREAS
OF THEIR COUNTRY.
SO ACTUALLY IN A WAY THEY COULD
HARNESS THAT POWER GOINGED FOR
BUT IT WILL BE DIFFICULT, BUT IT
WILL BE A KEY PART OF THE U.S.
STRATEGY.
>> Woodruff: HOW CLEAR IS IT
WHAT IS THE U.S. SHOULD BE DOING
AND WHO THE U.S. SHOULD BE
HELPING?
>> WHAT WE'RE GOING TO SEE IS
THE OBAMA POLICY TURNS INTO
REALLY WHAT HE'S DOING IN
AFGHANISTAN, SOMALIA, YEMEN,
WHICH IS HITTING -- DEGRADING
ISIS FROM THE AIR, AS HE'S DOING
PRESENTLY WITH DRONES AND
AIRPLANES, AND NOT REALLY TRYING
TO FIX SYRIA.
THAT'S THE CHEAP METHOD.
WHAT ANDREW IS PROPOSING AND
WHAT MANY PEOPLE ARE TALKING
ABOUT IN WASHINGTON IS BUILDING
A SYRIAN ARMY THAT CAN TAKE ON
ISIS AND ASSAD AND PUT SYRIA
BACK TOGETHER AGAIN.
I JUST DON'T SEE ANY RESOLVE TO
DO THAT ON THE PART OF THE
PRESIDENT OR MORE IMPORTANTLY ON
THE PART OF THE AMERICAN PEOPLE.
>> Woodruff: AND IS THAT
RIGHT?
ARE YOU-- IS THAT WHAT YOU'RE
SUGGESTING?
>> NO, I THINK THE PRESIDENT'S
PLAN IS CLEAR.
THE WHITE HOUSE SAYS IT'S CLEAR.
NOW, THE SPEED AT WHICH THEY CAN
RAMP THIS UP-- I THINK THERE'S A
RECOGNITION ON THE PART OF THE
WHITE HOUSE NOT THAT THEY'RE NOT
PAYING ATTENTION TO SYRIA, IT'S
JUST THE POLITICAL SOLUTION
ISN'T CLEAR THERE.
ALSO, THE INDICATION IS THE WAR
IS GOING TO GO ON FOR A VERY
LONG TIME.
SO I THINK THAT, THAT TO ME
INDICATES WE COULD HAVE A
DIVIDED SYRIA FOR QUITE SOME
TIME AND THAT WOULD BE WHERE THE
F.S.A. ENTERS FIRST AND GOINGED
FOR--
>> Woodruff: THAT'S THE FREE
SYRIAN ARMY.
>> YES, AND THEY COULD HAVE A
SETTLEMENT WITH THE SYRIAN ARMY
GOING FORWARD, BUT THAT'S IN THE
FUTURE.
>> Woodruff: FOR ANYONE
WATCHING THIS WHO IS WONDERING
WHAT IS THE UNITED STATES' STAKE
RIGHT NOW IN SYRIA?
HOW DO YOU SEE THAT?
HOW DO YOU ANSWER THE QUESTION
WHY DOES THIS MATTER FOR THE
UNITED STATES?
>> WELL, I THINK IT MATTERS
BECAUSE A FEW AMERICANS GOT
THEIR HEADS CHOPPED OFF, AND
U.S. INTELLIGENCE IS TELLING US
THAT THERE ARE PEOPLE IN
AL QAEDA, IN SYRIA, WHO ARE
TRYING TO PUT TOGETHER BOMBS AND
TEAMS THAT WILL BOMB THE WEST.
NOW, THEY'RE TRYING TO RUN A
COUNTER-TERRORISM OPERATION, AND
INCREASINGLY THAT LOOKS LIKE
IT'S LIMITED TO THAT.
THEY WANT TO SHOVE ISIS OUT OF
IRAQ, THE PRESIDENT'S BEEN
PRETTY CLEAR ABOUT THAT.
BUT SYRIA, WE HAVE A MUDDLED
MESSAGE.
TODAY, THE FREE SYRIAN ARMY
GROUPS THAT AMERICA HAS BEEN
SUPPORTING MAYBE CONTROL 1% OF
SYRIA, 2% EYE DON'T KNOW HOW
MUCH IT IS, BUT IT'S REALLY
NOTHING.
AND TO IMAGINE THAT AMERICA IS
GOING TO SOMEHOW TRANSFORM THEM
INTO CONQUERORS OF HALF OF SYRIA
OR EVEN THE WHOLE OF SYRIA BEGS
THE IMAGINATION--
>> Woodruff: LET ME GET ANDREW
TABLER FOR THE LAST WORD HERE.
WHY SHOULD AMERICANS BELIEVE
THERE'S ANY U.S. STAKE AT THIS
POINT?
>> WELL, THERE IS THE TERRORIST
THREAT.
YOU KNOW, THAT'S FOR SURE.
THE OTHER PROBLEM IS THAT THIS
IS ABOUT A REGIONAL WAR THAT'S
BEEN GOING ON BY PROXY, WHICH
THE PRESIDENT HAS TALKED ABOUT
ON A NUMBER OF OCCASIONS,
BETWEEN IRANIAN-BACKED MACHINES
AND THE SUNNI-BACKED REBELS
INSIDE OF SYRIA, AND THAT'S A
MARGE LARGER ISSUE, GIVEN ENERGY
PRICES AND A WHOLE SLEW OF OTHER
THINGS GIVEN OUR TREATY
OBLIGATIONS.
UNLESS YOU SOLVE SYRIA, YOU
CAN'T NOT ONLY DEGRADE ISIS BUT
I CAN'T DESTROY IT AND WITHOUT
DOING A DEAL WITH SYRIA, WE
CAN'T DEAL WITH THE JIHADISTS.
>> Woodruff: IT'S LOOKING MORE
AND MORE COMPLICATED ALMOST BY
THE DAY.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
>> Woodruff: ANDREW TABLER,
AND JOSHUA LANDIS, WE THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: WE TURN NOW TO
INDONESIA AND THE REMARKABLE
RECOVERY OF A COMMUNITY THAT WAS
NEARLY WIPED OUT BY NATURAL
DISASTER.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
KIRA KAYEPOR RTS.
>> Reporter: ON A SUNDAY
MORNING, THE VILLAGERS OF
LAMPUUK GATHER FOR A FEAST,
CELEBRATING THE START OF THE
HARVEST SEASON.
BUT LAMPUUK IS ALSO CELEBRATING
THE LIFE THAT HAS RETURNED TO
IT, A DECADE AFTER A WALL OF
WATER SWEPT THE VILLAGE AWAY.
MISRAN YUSUF IS THE VILLAGE'S
IMAM.
HE RECALLS A SCENE EERILY LIKE
THIS ONE ON DEC 26, 2004.
>> ( translated ): THERE WAS A
WEDDING THAT DAY.
WE WERE PREPARING FOOD AND ALL
OF A SUDDEN AN EARTHQUAKE HIT.
IT WAS SO STRONG PEOPLE FELL.
WE HAD NO IDEA THAT THE SEA
WATER WOULD RISE, WE HAD NEVER
HEARD OF A TSUNAMI.
>> Reporter: THE QUAKE THAT HIT
OFFSHORE WAS A 9.1 ON THE
MAGNITUDE SCALE.
WITHIN 20 MINUTES, WAVES 60 FEET
HIGH HIT THE REGION AT HUNDREDS
OF MILES PER HOUR.
>> ( translated ): IT SOUNDED
LIKE THUNDER.
I HELD MY BREATH AND THE WATER
CAME OVER THE ROOFTOPS.
WHEN I SURFACED I SAW PEOPLE
CLINGING TO A TREE TRUNK.
THEY PULLED ME ON BOARD AND WE
FLOATED UNTIL WE REACHED THE
NEXT VILLAGE.
>> Reporter: 130,000 PEOPLE DIED
AND WHOLE COMMUNITIES VANISHED.
LAMPUUK'S LONE STANDING MOSQUE
BECAME AN ICONIC IMAGE OF THE
DISASTER.
TEN YEARS LATER IT IS HARD TO
PICTURE THAT DESTRUCTION ON THE
STREETS OF THE CAPITAL CITY,
BANDA ACEH.
THE ONCE SHATTERED DOWNTOWN IS
NOW FIRMLY BACK IN BUSINESS.
THE RIVERSIDE, CHOKED WITH
DEBRIS, IS A THRIVING WATERFRONT
AGAIN.
PEOPLE OVERALL SEEM HAPPY.
THE TSUNAMI HAD CARVED A NEW
SHORELINE, DISAPPEARING WHOLE
BLOCKS OF THE COMMUNITY OF ULEE
LEE.
BUT NOW IT IS A FAVORITE BEACH
DESTINATION FOR FAMILIES, ONLY
SMALL HINTS REMAIN OF WHAT
HAPPENED HERE.
MAYOR ILLIZA SA'ADUDDIN SAYS THE
REGION HAS BUILT BACK BETTER.
>> ( translated ): THE ECONOMY
HAS IMPROVED, OUR POVERTY LEVEL
HAS DECREASED TO A RATE THAT IS
BELOW THE NATIONAL AVERAGE.
OUR INFRASTRUCTURE IS BETTER
THAN EVEN BEFORE THE TSUNAMI,
ROADS ARE NOW REACHING REMOTE
VILLAGES.
THERE ARE A LOT OF LESSONS THAT
ACEH CAN SHARE ABOUT HOW WE GOT
BACK ON OUR FEET AND HOW WE WERE
ABLE TO COOPERATE WITH MANY
INSTITUTIONS.
>> Reporter: THE INTERNATIONAL
DISASTER RESPONSE WAS A MASSIVE
$7 BILLION IN AID AND
RECONSTRUCTION.
WHILE NOT ENTIRELY CORRUPTION
FREE, THE PROCESS WAS OVERALL
TRANSPARENT AND RESPONSIVE TO
ACTUAL NEED.
THE BIGGEST CHALLENGE WAS TO
PROVIDE HOUSING FOR HALF A
MILLION NEWLY HOMELESS.
BUT TEN YEARS ON, NEARLY
EVERYONE WHO NEEDED A PERMANENT
HOME HAS GOTTEN ONE.
>> ( translated ): THE TSUNAMI
FEELS LIKE IT WAS ONLY A MONTH
AGO.
BUT THANK GOODNESS, WE HAVE
REBUILT OUR LIVES.
>> Reporter: MURNI AND SAKINAH
BOTH LIVED IN ULEE LHEUE AND
MANAGED TO OUTRUN THE WAVES.
AFTER LIVING IN A DISPLACEMENT
CAMP, THEY WERE GIVEN HOUSES IN
A SPRAWLING COMMUNITY
OVERLOOKING BANDA ACEH, KNOWN AS
JACKIE CHAN HILL-- THE ACTION
STAR HELPED FUND THE
CONSTRUCTION.
>> ( translated ): WE'D PREFER
TO STAY HERE, RATHER THAN IN
ULEE LHEUE WHERE IT'S SO CLOSE
TO THE SEA.
I GET FRIGHTENED EVEN WHERE'S
WIND LIKE THIS, LET ALONE AN
EARTHQUAKE.
>> Reporter: IN LAAMPUUK, 800 OF
THE 1,000 RESIDENTS DIED, BUT
SURVIVORS CHOSE TO RETURN TO
THEIR ANCESTRAL LAND.
AND THEY NOW HAVE AN ACTION
PLAN.
>> ( translated ): IF A QUAKE IS
STRONG, WE RUSH TO THE NEARBY
HILL.
WE ALSO HAVE PEOPLE ON LOOKOUT
BY THE SEA, IF THE LEVEL CHANGES
THEY WILL RUSH HERE AND ALERT
US.
I'M SO GRATEFUL FOR THE HELP
FROM OTHER COUNTRIES.
A LOT OF COUNTRIES CAME, EVEN
GEORGE BUSH AND BILL CLINTON
CAME TO MY VILLAGE!
>> Reporter: ACEH'S GRATITUDE TO
THE WORLD IS CLEAR.
BANDA ACEH'S CENTRAL PARK HAS
BEEN TURNED INTO A MONUMENT OF
THANKS, EACH DONOR COUNTRY
ACKNOWELDGED INDIVIDUALLY.
A WORLD CLASS MUSEUM TO THE
TSUNAMI IS A HUGE WEEKEND DRAW,
MOST OF THE VISITORS ARE
ACEHNESE, MANY TOO YOUNG TO
REMEMBER WHAT HAPPENED HERE.
THE WALLS DESCRIBE IN DETAIL THE
GLOBAL RESPONSE, AND THERE ARE
DISPLAYS TEACHING THE SCIENCE AT
THE ROOT OF THE DISASTER.
AND NEARBY, A STARTLING SITE, A
MASSIVE ELECTRICITY BARGE THAT
WAS CARRIED THREE MILES INLAND
BY A WAVE AND DROPPED IN THE
MIDDLE OF A NEIGHBORHOOD.
AUTHORITIES DECIDED TO LEAVE IT
IN PLACE.
LINA HERLENA IS A CERTIFIED
TOURGUIDE.
>> IT SHOWS OUR STRENGTH.
IT SHOWS OUR STRENGTH THAT AFTER
THE TSUNAMI OUR LIVES HAVE NOT
STOPPED.
OUR LIVES HAVE NOT ENDED.
IT ALSO TEACHES OUR GENERATION
LESSONS FROM WHAT HAPPENED IN
THE TSUNAMI.
>> Reporter: THESE LESSONS
EXTEND TO NEW EMERGENCY RESPONSE
PROCEDURES, IMPLEMENTED BY THE
CITY'S TSUNAMI CENTER.
DR. ELLA MEILIANDA MANAGES THE
PROGRAM.
>> THE ROAD IS WIDER NOW. AND
THE COASTAL ROAD HAS BEEN
DESIGNED IN A WAY THAT IT IS
QUITE FAR AWAY FROM THE
COASTLINE.
AND THEN THEY HAVE CLEAR MARKS
OF EVACUATION ROUTES.
>> Reporter: TSUNAMI SIRENS DOT
THE SKYLINE, THEY WARN CITIZENS
WHEN AN EARTHQUAKE OF SEVEN OR
HIGHER IS DETECTED OUT AT SEA.
WHEN THEY SOUND, RESINTSDE
SHOULD MAKE THEIR WAY TO A
VERTICAL EVACUATION SITE-- WATER
RESISTANT HIGH RISES WITH A
HELIPAD PAD ON TOP.
>> WE HAVE 17 JUNIOR HIGH
SCHOOLS UNDER OUR PROGRAM.
AND FOR THESE SCHOOLS, THEY KNOW
WHAT TO DO.
THEY HAVE BUILT THEIR OWN
EVACUATION ROUTE, WHERE THE
MEETING POINT FOR ALL THESE
CHILDREN, AND HOW THE PARENTS
SHOULD PICK THEM UP.
>> Reporter: BUT THE FIRST
ACTIVATION OF THE SYSTEM DIDN'T
GO VERY WELL.
IN 2012, AN 8.6 EARTHQUAKE HIT
THE AREA AND PEOPLE PANICKED,
NOT FOLLOWING EVACUATION
PROCEDURE AND JAMMING THE
STREETS WITVEHIH CLES.
MEILIANDA AGREES THAT MORE
PUBLIC TRAINING IS STILL NEEDED,
BUT SAYS THE PSYCHOLOGICAL
LEGACY OF 2004 IS ALSO TO BLAME.
>> SUDDENLY IT HAPPENED AGAIN
AND THEY GOT REALLY TRAUMATIZED
AND DID NOT KNOW WHAT TO DO,
IT'S JUST LIKE A BLANK.
WHAT WE HAVE LEARNED ALSO
THROUGHOUT ALMOST TEN YEARS NOW,
IS THAT THE RECOVERY IS MORE
TOWARD THE PHYSICAL RECOVERY,
RECONSTRUCTION, BUT NOT REALLY
ON THE TRAUMA HEALING ITSELF.
IT STILL NEEDS TO BE DONE IN A
MORE SUSTAINABLE WAY.
>> Reporter: TOUR GUIDE LINA IS
ALSO A SURVIVOR.
SHE FINDS A FORM OF THERAPY
THROUGH HERORK. W
>> AT THE BEGINNING OF WORKING
HERE I FELT LIKE IT WAS VERY
HARD TO TALK TO OTHER PEOPLE, TO
ANSWER THE SAME QUESTIONS ABOUT
WHAT HAPPENED TO ME AT THE TIME.
I FEEL LIKE I EXPERIENCED
FLASHBACKS.
BUT AS TIME GOES ON, IT REALLY
HELPS ME TO RECOVER FROM THE
TRAUMA.
>> Reporter: PERHAPS MOST
STARTLING IN ACEH'S STORY OF
RECOVERY IS THE PERSPECTIVE
ACEHNESE SHARE: THAT THE
TSUNAMI, FOR ALL ITS
DESTRUCTION, ALSO HAD A SILVER
LINING.
IT ENDED 30 YEARS OF CIVIL WAR
THAT HAD ALREADY TORN ARTAP
SOCIETY, LEAVING THOUSANDS DEAD
AND MANY PEOPLE TORTURED BY THE
OCCUPYING INDONESIAN MILITARY.
>> IT WAS KIND OF LIKE ALMOST
ENDLESS.
I MEAN, WE NEVER THOUGHT THAT IT
WOULD END AT SOME POINT.
BUT BECAUSE  THEOF TSUNAMI, THEN
EVERYBODY STOPPED TO THINK, 'OK,
WE HAVE TO STOP THIS CONFLICT.'
SO THIS IS REALLY LIKE A
BLESSING IN DISGUISE FOR THE
ACEHNESE COMMUNITY.
>> Reporter: WITHIN MONTHS OF
THE TSUNAMI, THE INNESIDOAN
GOVERNMENT AND SEPARATIST REBELS
SIGNED A PEACE DEAL.
THE PRESENCE OF AID
ORGANIZATIONS AT THE TIME KEPT
ACEH OPEN TO THE WORLD AND
ENSURED THE PEACE WOULD HOLD.
ON A BEACH THAT TEN YEARS AGO
WAS LITTERED WITH THE DEBRIS OF
PEOPLE'S LIVES, THE PALM TREES
SHEARED OFF AT THE STUMP,
ACEHNESE FAMILIES TODAY ARE
ENJOYING A FEELING OF NORMALITY
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN DECADES.
FREE FROM WAR, MORE PREPARED FOR
DISASTER IF IT COMES AGAIN, AND
GRATEFUL FOR THE TIME THEY HAVE
NOW.
>> Woodruff: ANOTHER RESULT OF
THE TSUNAMI IN ACEH WAS THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF SHARIA LAW IN
THE PROVINCE.
YOU CAN WATCH KIRA'S EARLIER
REPORT, WHERE SHE GAINED SPECIAL
ACCESS TO THE AREA'S RELIGIOUS
POLICE FORCE, ON OUR WEBSITE.
THE STORIES WERE PRODUCED IN
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE BUREAU FOR
INTERNATIONAL REPORTING.
>> Ifill: THERE'S BEEN MOUNTING
PRESSURE ON COLLEGE AND
UNIVERSITY CAMPUSES TO TAKE NEW
STEPS TO CURB SEXUAL ASSAULT.
ONE APPROACH: TO REDEFINE THE
WAY SEXUAL CONSENT IS GIVEN
THROUGH AN AFFIRMATIVE FORM OF
CONSENT THAT SHIFTS THE FOCUS
FROM NO, TO YES.
BUT THAT PREMISE HAS JUMP
STARTED ITS OWN DEBATE.
HARI SREENIVASAN HAS OUR LOOK.
>> Sreenivasan: CALIFORNIA
RECENTLY MADE AFFIRMATIVE
CONSENT THE LAW.
AND OTHER STATES ARE CONSIDERING
SIMILAR MOVES WHILE MANY SCHOOLS
HAVE MADE IT A PART OF THEIR
POLICY.
HERE TO DISCUSS THIS ARE JACLYN
FRIEDMAN, EDITOR OF THE BOOK
"YES MEANS YES: VISIONS OF
FEMALE SEXUAL POWER AND A WORLD
WITHOUT RAPE."
AND SHIKHA DALMIA OF THE REASON
FOUNDATION, A LIBERTARIAN THINK
TANK.
SHE IS ALSO A COLUMNIST FOR THE
MAGAZINE, "THE WEEK."
MISS FRIEDMAN, I WANT TO START
WITH YOU.
EXPLAIN EXACTLY WHAT AFFIRMATIVE
CONSENT MEANS AND WHY DO YOU
THINK IT'S NECESSARY?
>> AFFIRMATIVE CONSENT IS THE
BASIC PRINCIPLE THAT ALL PEOPLE
PARTICIPATING IN A SEXUAL ACT OR
EXPERIENCE WITH EACH OTHER HAVE
TO MAKE SURE THAT THEIR PARTNER
IS NOT ONLY NOT OBJECTING BUT
THAT THEY'RE ACTUALLY ACTIVELY
INTO WHATEVER IS HAPPENING.
IT'S REALLY THAT SIMPLE.
AND IF YOU CAN'T TELL, YOU HAVE
TO ASK.
IT'S NECESSARY BECAUSE NO MEANS
NO, WHICH WE'VE ALL LEARNED, IS
NOT ADEQUATE.
THERE ARE A LOT OF SITUATION
WHERE'S IF A PERSON FEELS
THREATENED OR OVERPOWERED, THEY
MAY FREEZE UP AND NOT PROTEST,
EVEN THOUGH THEY DON'T WANT
ANYTHING TO HAPPEN TO THEM.
OR THAT THEY MIGHT BE
INCAPACITATED FROM DRUGS OR
ALCOHOL AND CAN'T PROTEST.
AND OFTENTIMES THESE ARE USED AS
DEFENSES BY RAPISTS AND THEY GET
AWAY WITH IT, AND ARE LEFT FREE
TO REOFFEND.
WE REALLY NEED TO MOVE TO A
STANDARD SATHAT SAYS IT'S ON ALL
OF US TO MAKE SURE THAT OUR
PARTNERS ARE ACTIVELY ENJOYING
WHATEVER IS HAPPENING BETWEEN
US, WHICH SEEMS ALSO LIKE A
PRETTY BASIC HUMAN PRINCIPLE.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT SEEMS
FAIRLY LOGICAL.
WHAT'S WRONG WITH IT.
>> IT DOES.
CONSENT IS REQUIRED UNDER
CURRENT LAW.
NO MEANS NO ALSO MEANS CONSENT,
THAT YOU CANNOT HAVE SEX WITH
SOMEBODY WHO HAS NOT CONSENTED.
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN NO MEANS
NO AND YES MEANS YES IS IT PUTS
THE BURDEN OF PROOF ON THE
PERSON TO OBTAIN CONSENT.
IT CHANGES THE PRESUMPTION IN A
VERY ESSENTIAL WAY THAT THE
PERSON WHO IS ACCUSED WILL NO
LONGER BE SORT OF ASSUMED
INNOCENT UNTIL PROVEN GUILTY.
IT WILL BE THE OTHER WAY AROUND
GLA MISS FRIEDMAN, WHAT ABOUT
THAT SWITCH, THE PRESUMPTION HAS
SWIHEDTSWITCHED FROM INNOCENCE O
GUILT?
>> WELL, WE DON'T SAY THAT WHEN
WE SAY A KIDNAPPER, WHEN WE ASK
A KIDNAPPER, LIKE, "DID YOU HAVE
PERMISSION TO TAKE THEM
SOMEWHERE?"
RIGHT, SO THAT DOESN'T CREATE
PRESUMPTION OF GUILT.
SO I DON'T KNOW SEE WHY IT WOULD
BE DIFFERENT IN SEXUAL ASSAULT.
WHAT IT DOES IS CHANGES THE
DEFAULT ASSUMPTION THAT IF
YOU'RE ENCOUNTERING SOMEONE
SEXUALLY, CURRENTLY UNDER
CURRENT RULES AND REGULATIONS
THE ASSUMPTION IS YOU CAN DO
WHATEVER YOU WANT TO THEIR BODY
UNTIL THEY STOP YOU AND THIS
CHANGES THE DEFAULT ASSUMPTION
WHICH SUCAN'T DO ANYTHING TO
ANYBODY ELSE'S BODY WITHOUT
THEIR ENTHUSIASTIC CONCEPT.
>> Sreenivasan: SO?
>> WELL,UN, IF YOU NOTICE WHAT
JACLYN WAS SAYING, IT SHIFTED
FROM CONSENT TO ENTHUSIASTIC
CONSENT, WHICH IS KIND OF WHAT
THE PROBLEM IS.
IT CEEND OF MISTAKES HOW HUMAN
SEXUALITY ACTUALLY WORKS.
PEOPLE DON'T IT'S WAY THE YES
MEANS YES STANDARD WILL WORK IS
THAT YOU HAVE TO GIVE YOUR
ENTHUSIASTIC CONSENT NOT JUST AT
THE VERY BEGINNING OR AT ONE
POINT IN THE ACT.
IT HAS TO BE ONGOING CONSENT.
SO YOU MOVE FROM KISSING TO
FONDLING TO OTHER ACTS.
IT HAS TO BE ACHIEVED AT EVERY
STEP.
THAT'S JUST NOT HOW HUMAN BEINGS
HAVE SEX.
AND, YET, THIS PARTICULAR
STANDARD WILL PUT THE BURDEN OF
PROOF ON THE ACCUSED TO PROVE
THAT THEY SOMEHOW OBTAINED
ENTHUSIASTIC CONCEPT WHEN THAT'S
JUST NOT HOW THENGZ WORK IN THE
BEDROOM DISPLAR MISS FRIEDMAN
WITHOUT EVEN THE WORD
"ENTHUSIASTIC" HOW PRACTICAL IS
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF IT?
DO COUPLES HAVE TO HAVE WRITTEN
CONSENT HAVE A TEXT, OR HOW DO
THEY PROVE THIS IN COURT WITH
THINGS GO BACK IN THEIR
RELATIONSHIP?
>> FIRST OF ALL, THERE IS NO
COURT.
THE AFFIRMATIVE CONSENT IN
CALIFORNIA APPLIES TO COLLEGE
JUDICIAL BOARDS.
THE QUESTION IS CAN YOU REMAIN
PART OF THE CAMPUS COMMUNITY OR
NOT?
THERE ARE NO COURTS INVOLVED.
THERE ARE NO JAILS INVOLVED.
THAT'S NOT WHAT WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT.
A CAMPUS COMMUNITY IS A
VOLUNTARY COMMUNITY THAT NOBODY
HAS A GHTRI TO JOIN OR REMAIN
IN.
I JUST WANT TO CLEAR THAT UP.
AND CAMPUSES HAVE AN OBLIGATION
UNDER TITLE IX TO PROVIDE A SAFE
ENVIRONMENT FOR ALL STUDENTS
REGARDLESS OF GENDER AND THE
SUPREME COURT RULED A LONG TIME
AGO THAT APPLIES TO ADDRESSING
RAPE AND SEXUAL VIOLENCE ON
CAMPUS.
OF COURSE, WE ARE NOT TALKING
ABOUT WRITTEN CONSENT OR YOU
DON'T NEED A NOTARY IN THE ROOM
TO TOUCH MY LEFT BREAST.
IT'S VERY PRACTICAL.
I CAN TELL YOU I PRACTICE IT ALL
THE TIME AND SO DO PLENTY OF
PEOPLE.
TALL REQUIRES IS THAT YOU PAY
ATTENTION TO YOUR PARTNER.
YOU CAN BE ENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT
TRYING SOMETHING.
FINDING OUT HOW SOMETHING GOES.
YOU CAN BE ENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT
IT'S NOT LIKE YOU HAVE TO BE AT
FINDING OUT HOW SOMETHING GOES.
A PEAK SEXUAL APPEARANCE THE
IT'S NOT LIKE YOU HAVE TO BE AT
WHOLE TIME.
A PEAK SEXUAL APPEARANCE THE
IF YOU'RE UNSURE WHETHER OR NOT
WHOLE TIME.
YOUR PARTNER IS ACTIVELY INTO
IF YOU'RE UNSURE WHETHER OR NOT
WHATEVER IS HAPPENING, YOU JUST
YOUR PARTNER IS ACTIVELY INTO
HAVE TO MAKE SURE WHETHER THAT'S
WHATEVER IS HAPPENING, YOU JUST
VERBALLY, IF YOU FEEL CONFIDENT
HAVE TO MAKE SURE WHETHER THAT'S
THAT YOU CAN READ THEIR BODY
VERBALLY, IF YOU FEEL CONFIDENT
LANGUAGE, THAT'S OW TO FEEL
THAT YOU CAN READ THEIR BODY
CONFIDENT.
LANGUAGE, THAT'S OW TO FEEL
YOU CAN SAY, YOU KNOW, THESE--
CONFIDENT.
THIS IS THE BODY LANGUAGE THEY
YOU CAN SAY, YOU KNOW, THESE--
WOULD POINT TO.
THIS IS THE BODY LANGUAGE THEY
IT'S JUST ABOUT PRESENT AND IN
WOULD POINT TO.
COMMUNICATION WITH YOUR SEXUAL
IT'S JUST ABOUT PRESENT AND IN
PARTNER WHICH IS SOMETHING THAT
COMMUNICATION WITH YOUR SEXUAL
WILL MAKE ALL OF OUR SEX LIVES
PARTNER WHICH IS SOMETHING THAT
BETTER ANYWAY.
WILL MAKE ALL OF OUR SEX LIVES
>> Sreenivasan: ARE YOU
BETTER ANYWAY.
CONCERNED IT IMPACTS LIFE BEYOND
>> Sreenivasan: ARE YOU
CAMPUSES?
CONCERNED IT IMPACTS LIFE BEYOND
>> YES, YOU KNOW, FEMINISTS HAVE
CAMPUSES?
MADE NO SECRET ABOUT THIS, THE
>> YES, YOU KNOW, FEMINISTS HAVE
CAMPUS YES MEANS YES LAW IS JUST
MADE NO SECRET ABOUT THIS, THE
A PRECURSOR TO HOW THEY ACTUALLY
CAMPUS YES MEANS YES LAW IS JUST
WANT TO DEAL WITH RAPE CASES IN
A PRECURSOR TO HOW THEY ACTUALLY
CRIMINAL SETTINGS, WHICH IS
WANT TO DEAL WITH RAPE CASES IN
ESSENTIALLY CHANGING THE BURDEN
CRIMINAL SETTINGS, WHICH IS
OF PROOF FROM THE PERSON WHO IS
ESSENTIALLY CHANGING THE BURDEN
ACCUSING TO THE PERSON WHO IS
OF PROOF FROM THE PERSON WHO IS
ACCUSED, WHICH IS ACTUALLY VERY,
ACCUSING TO THE PERSON WHO IS
VERY FUNDAMENTAL.
ACCUSED, WHICH IS ACTUALLY VERY,
WE CAN CLAIM THAT, WELL, YOU
VERY FUNDAMENTAL.
KNOW, ON CAMPUSES YOU'RE NOT
WE CAN CLAIM THAT, WELL, YOU
ACTUALLY THROWING PEOPLE IN JAIL
KNOW, ON CAMPUSES YOU'RE NOT
SO IT'S OKAY.
ACTUALLY THROWING PEOPLE IN JAIL
THE FACT OF THE MATTER IS YOU
SO IT'S OKAY.
ARE RUINING LIVES.
THE FACT OF THE MATTER IS YOU
THE CENTRAL PROBLEM WITH YES
ARE RUINING LIVES.
MEANS YES STANDARD IS, IN MY
THE CENTRAL PROBLEM WITH YES
VIEW, IS THAT IT WILL ACTUALLY
MEANS YES STANDARD IS, IN MY
NOT DO ALL THAT MUCH TO SNAG
VIEW, IS THAT IT WILL ACTUALLY
REAL RAPISTS.
NOT DO ALL THAT MUCH TO SNAG
IT WILL GO AFTER PEOPLE WHO
REAL RAPISTS.
ACTUALLY DIDN'T, YOU KNOW, MEAN
IT WILL GO AFTER PEOPLE WHO
ANY HARM.
ACTUALLY DIDN'T, YOU KNOW, MEAN
THEY WERE NOT INTENDING TO RAPE
ANY HARM.
OR THEY'RE NOT SAVVY ENOUGH TO
THEY WERE NOT INTENDING TO RAPE
BEAT THE SYSTEM.
OR THEY'RE NOT SAVVY ENOUGH TO
THEY WILL ESSENTIALLY-- PEOPLE
BEAT THE SYSTEM.
WHO ARE PREDATORS AND SAVVY
THEY WILL ESSENTIALLY-- PEOPLE
ENOUGH TO RAPE ARE ALSO SAVVY
WHO ARE PREDATORS AND SAVVY
ENOUGH TO LIE IN CAMPUS
ENOUGH TO RAPE ARE ALSO SAVVY
INVESTIGATIONS.
ENOUGH TO LIE IN CAMPUS
AND THE PROBLEM WITH YES MEANS
INVESTIGATIONS.
YES IS THAT IT DOESN'T REALLY
AND THE PROBLEM WITH YES MEANS
ESSENTIALLY GET OVER THE HE
YES IS THAT IT DOESN'T REALLY
SAID/SHE SAID PROBLEM.
ESSENTIALLY GET OVER THE HE
SO THAT PROBLEM REMAINS THE
SAID/SHE SAID PROBLEM.
SAME.
SO THAT PROBLEM REMAINS THE
ON THE OTHER HAND, IT WILL MAKE
SAME.
IT VERY, VERY DIFFICULT FOR
ON THE OTHER HAND, IT WILL MAKE
INNOCENT PEOPLE TO ACTUALLY
IT VERY, VERY DIFFICULT FOR
PROVE THAT THEY ARE INNOCENT, SO
INNOCENT PEOPLE TO ACTUALLY
YOU WILL CREATE A LOT OF VICTIMS
PROVE THAT THEY ARE INNOCENT, SO
IN THE COURSE OF ACTUALLY
YOU WILL CREATE A LOT OF VICTIMS
SOLVING A PROBLEM THAT ISN'T
IN THE COURSE OF ACTUALLY
QUITE THE WAY IT SHOULD BE
SOLVING A PROBLEM THAT ISN'T
SOLVED.
QUITE THE WAY IT SHOULD BE
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY SHIKHA
SOLVED.
DALMIA AND JACLYN FRIEDMAN,
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY SHIKHA
THANK YOU THBO FOR YOUR TIME.
DALMIA AND JACLYN FRIEDMAN,
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
THANK YOU THBO FOR YOUR TIME.
>> ABSOLUTELY, THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: IN WESK, EBOLA
HAS HAD A FATALITY RATE OF
NEARLY 50%.
IN THE U.S. THERE HAVE BEEN A
HAND FULL OF CASES SO FAR, AND
THE DEATH RATE HAS BEEN FAR
SS.LE
NINE PEOPLE HAVE BEEN TREATED,
SEVEN HAVE RECOVERED EONE DIED,
THOMAS ERIC DUNCAN, AND ONE
REMAINS HOSPITALIZED IN NEW YORK
IN STABLE BUT IMPROVING
CONDITION.
HE'S DR. CRAIG SPENCER.
WHAT HELPS EXPLAIN WHAT'S
WORKING DIFFERENTLY IN THE U.S.
AND IS IT REP LICKABLE?
DR. BRUCE RIBNER HAS OVERSEEN
THE CARE OF FOUR EBOLA PATIENTS
AT THE EMORY UNIVERSITY HOSPIT
HOSPITAL.
MR. RIBNER, THANK YOU VERY MUCH
FOR JOINING US.
FIRST, JUST QUICKLY, IS IT
ACCURATE TO SAY THAT THE
RECOVERY RATE AT THIS POINT IN
THE U.S. FAR BETTER THAN IT IS
IN WEST AFRICA?
>> THE RECOVERY RATE IN THE
UNITED STATES IS SUBSTANTIALLY
BETTER THAN IN WEST AFRICA OR
THE CASES IN CENTRAL AFRICA,
YES.
>> Woodruff: AND WHY IS THAT?
>> EBOLA VIRUS DISEASE BASICALLY
RAVISHES EVERY ORGAN IN THE
BODY, AND WHAT THE PATIENT NEEDS
IS AGGRESSIVE SUPPORT UNTIL THE
BODY CAN CONTROL THE VIRUS AND
THE FUNCTIONS OF THE VARIOUS
ORGANS CAN RECOVER.
UNFORTUNATELY, THE
INFRASTRUCTURE IN MOST OF AFRICA
IS SUCH THAT OUR COLLEAGUES OVER
THERE ARE NOT CAPABLE OF
AGGRESSIVE SUPPORTIVE MEASURES.
WE HAVE THE LUXURY OF VERY GOOD
INFRASTRUCTURE, AND SO WE WOULD
ANTICIPATE THAT WHILE OUR
FATALITY RATES IN THE U.S. WOULD
NOT BE ZERO, THEY WOULD BE
SUBSTANTIALLY LESS THAN THE
RATES WE SEE IN AFRICA.
>> Woodruff: WHAT DO YOU MEAN
BY "INFRASTRUCTURE?"
>> IN OTHER WORDS, WHEN WE
RECEIVE OUR PATIENTS FROM
AFRICA, MORE OFTEN THAN NOT,
THEY HAVE HAD NO BLOOD TESTING
AT ALL, NO CHEMISTRIES, NO
HEMATOLOGY TESTS, NO PLATELET
COUNTS, ANY OF THAT.
THEY JUST DON'T HAVE THE
CAPABILITY OF DOING THOSE TESTS
IN THEIR FACILITIES.
AT THE OTHER END OF THE
SPECTRUM, WE HAVE ENORMOUS
SUPPORT STRUCTURE AND WE CAN DO
A LOT OF TESTING THAT THEY ARE
UNABLE TO DO AND MANAGE THE
DIFFERENT ORGANS FAILING MUCH
BETTER THAN THEY'RE ABLE TO DO.
>> Woodruff: IS IT JUST A
MATTER OF SOPHISTICATED
MEDICINE?
OR ARE WE TALKING ABOUT
HYDRATION?
ARE THERE MEDICINES AVAILABLE
HERE THAT AREN'T AVAILABLE
THERE?
WE KNOW BLOOD PLASMA OF FORMER
EBOLA PATIENTS HAS BEEN USED IN
THE U.S.
>> IT'S REALLY ALL OF THOSE.
IN MANY OF THOSE FACILITIES, THE
NURSING SUPPORT IS SUCH THAT
THEY CAN GIVE A LIMITED AMOUNT
OF FLUID, AND AS WE HAVE SEEN IN
OUR PATIENTS, PATIENTS DURING
THE MOST EXTREME FORM OF ILLNESS
ARE LOSING FIVE TO 10 LITERS A
DAY, AND THEY JUST CAN'T KEEP UP
WITH THAT.
IN ADDITION, BECAUSE WE HAVE THE
ABILITY TO MEASURE THE PATIENTS'
CHEMISTRIES AND FLUID LEVELS,
WE'RE MUCH MORE CAPABLE OF
REPLACING THOSE FLUIDS EXACTLY
TO THE EXTENT THAT THE PATIENT
IS LOSING THEM.
AND THEN FINALLY, BLOOD BANKS IN
THE UNITED STATES, WHETHER IT BE
PLATELETS, WHETHER IT BE PLASMA,
WHETHER IT BE TRANSFUSION, IS
JUST DRAMATICALLY MORE
SOPHISTICATE THAN WHAT OUR
COLLEAGUES IN AFRICA HAVE ACCESS
TO.
>> Woodruff: AND SO MY
QUESTION THEN IS WHAT IS DONE IN
THE UNITED STATES RIGHT NOW, TO
WHAT EXTENT CAN THAT BE
REPLICATED IN PLACES LIKE
SIEERIE LEONE AND ELSEWHERE IN
WEST AFRICA WHERE EBOLA IS STILL
RAGING?
>> OUR COLLEAGUES IN WEST AFRICA
HAVE ENORMOUS HURDLES TO TRY AND
REACH THE LEVEL OF
SOPHISTICATION THAT WE HAVE IN
THE UNITED STATES.
MANY OF THEIR FACILITIES ARE NOT
EVEN AIR CONDITIONED.
AND IN THE HEAT AND HUMIDITY
THAT EXISTS IN MANY OF THEIR
FACILITIES, EVEN IF WE BRING
SOME OF OUR INSTRUMENTATION OVER
THERE, IT RAPIDLY FAILS WITHIN A
FEW WEEKS TO A COUPLE OF MONTHS.
AND SO THEY-- THEY HAVE ENORMOUS
HURDLES IN TERMS OF CREATING THE
TYPE OF INFRASTRUCTURE THAT WE
TAKE FOR GRANTED IN THE UNITED
STATES.
>> Woodruff: WE ARE GOING TO
LEAVE IT THERE, BUT WE THANK YOU
VERY MUCH, DR. BRUCE RIBNER AT
EMORY UNIVERSITY, THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: FINALLY TONIGHT, A
RENOWNED BALLERINA RAISING THE
BAR FOR YOUNG DANCERS WILL SOON
BE HONORED BY THE KENNEDY CENTER
FOR HER LIFELONG DEVOTION TO HER
WORK ON STAGE AND OFF.
>> Brown: FINALLY TONIGHT, A
RENOWNED BALLERINA RAISES THE
BAR FOR YOUNG DANCERS.
AND SHE'S SOON BEING HONORED BY
THE KENNEDY CENTER FOR HER
LIFELONG DEVOTION TO HER WORK ON
STAGE AND OFF.
"THE FOUR TEMPERAMENTS," A DANCE
CHOREOGRAPHED BY GEORGE
BALANCHINE IN 1946.
AT THE CHARLOTTE BALLET
RECENTLY, PATRICIA MCBRIDE
TAUGHT IT TO HER DANCERS.
SHE SHOULD KNOW.
FOR 28 YEARS, MCBRIDE HERSELF
PERFORMED THE WORK OF
BALANCHINE.
AS A PRINCIPAL DANCER FOR THE
NEW YORK CITY BALLET.
AND OFTEN THE MASTER
CHOREOGRAPHER CREATED DANCES
SPECIFICALLY FOR HER.
>> IF HE SAID TO JUMP OFF THAT
BRIDGE.
WE'D ALL JUMP, BECAUSE WE HAD SO
MUCH TRUST IN HIM.
>> Brown: IN DECEMBER, McBRIDE,
NOW AGE 72, WILL FOLLOW IN THE
FOOTSTEPS OF HER MENTOR.
AS A KENNEDY CENTER HONOREE FOR
HER LIFE AS A DANCER AND CO
DIRECTOR OF A VIBRANT BALLET
COMPANY.
PATRICIA McBRIDE'S STORY BEGAN
AS A YOUNG GIRL IN TEANECK, NEW
JERSEY, WHEN HER MOTHER, RAISING
TWO CHILDREN ON HER OWN, PUT HER
IN A DANCE CLASS.
>> I THINK MY MOM AND MY GRANDMA
JUST THOUGHT IT WOULD BE NICE
FOR LITTLE GIRLS TO DO, IT
SEEMED LIKE ALL LITTLE GIRLS AT
THAT TIME WERE, BALLET WAS ONE
OF THE THING THAT THEY WOULD DO,
AND THEY BOUGHT ME A PAIR OF
BALLET SLIPPERS, AND THERE I
WENT.
>> Brown: YOU WENT ALONG.
>> AND MY MOM JUST DROVE ME
EVERY WEEK, FIRST ONCE A WEEK,
THEN TWICE, THEN THREE TIMES AND
THEN EVERY DAY.
AND IT STARTED GETTING MORE
SERIOUS AS THE YEARS WENT ON.
>> Brown: AND IT BECAME A LIFE.
>> IT BECAME A WONDER LIFE, A
WONDERFUL LIFE.
>> Brown: SHE JOINED
BALANCHINE'S SCHOOL OF AMERICAN
BALLET AT 14 AND AT 18 BECAME
HIS COMPANY'S YOUNGEST EVER
PRINCIPAL DANCER.
OVER THE YEARS, SHE DEBUTED MANY
ROLES AND PARTNERED WITH LEADING
MALE DANCERS OF THE ERA,
INCLUDING EDWARD VILELLA.
HERE IN TARANTELLA.
THE NEW YORK CITY BALLET IS ALSO
WHERE SHE MET HER HUSBAND, JEAN-
PIERRE BONNEFOUX, A FRENCHMEN
WHO HAD DANCED AT THE PARIS
OPERA BEFORE COMING TO NEW YORK
TO WORK WITH BALANCHINE.
>> I JUST LOVE THAT GESTURE.
>> Brown: THEY WERE ALREADY A
COUPLE BUT HAD NEVER DANCED
TOGETHER WHEN ONE NIGHT HIS
PARTNER FELL ILL AND McBRIDE
HAD TO STEP IN.
>> WE WERE IN LOVE AND WE WERE
TOGETHER BUT I HAD NEVER DONE A
PIROUETTE WITH HIM, HE HAD NEVER
LAID HIS HANDS ON ME, AND WE
HAVE FIVE MINUTES FOR
INTERMISSION AND THERE WERE
DANCING AND IT WAS WONDERFUL,
YOU KNOW, BUT THEN LATER ON WE
STARTED, AND WE HAD SOME BALLETS
TOGETHER AND IT WASN'T WORKING
TOO WELL BECAUSE WE'D HAVE
LITTLE YOU KNOW HOW IT IS BUT WE
FOUND.
>> Brown: WAIT, YOU KNOW HOW IT
IS?
>> A COUPLE, YOU KNOW, USUALLY
BALLERINAS LIKE TO TELL THEIR
PARTNERS, "OH, JUST PUSH ME A
LITTLE MORE THIS WAY" OR "GET ME
ON MY LEG."
( LAUGHTER )
THEY WORKED IT OUT.
AND MARRIED IN GRAND FASHION IN
PARIS.
McBRIDE RETIRED FROM THE NEW
YORK CITY BALLET IN 1989 AT AGE
46.
IN A FAREWELL PERFORMANCE THAT
ENDED IN OVATIONS AND FLOWERS.
THE COUPLE TURNED TO TEACHING,
FIRST AT INDIANA UNIVERSITY AND
THEN, SINCE 1996, RUNNING THE
CHARLOTTE BALLET.
BECOMING MENTORS TO NEW A
GENERATION OF DANCERS.
>> SHE'S KINDA LIKE MY BALLET
MOM, IN A WAY.
SHE'S REALLY RAISED ME.
>> Brown: 25 YEAR OLD ANNA
GERBERICH MEANS IT SHE BEGAN
WORKING WITH McBRIDE AT AGE 15.
>> PATTI IS AN AMAZING WOMAN.
WE WOULD ALWAYS WATCH HER
VIDEOS, SO IT WAS SOMETHING, SHE
WAS THIS GODDESS ON THIS TV
SCREEN TO ME SHE'S THE MOST
HUMBLE, DOWN TO EARTH PERSON I
HAVE TO SAY SHE'S ALWAYS RIGHT
WHEN SHE COACHES YOU, AND IT'S
JUST INCREDIBLE TO LEARN FROM
HER.
>> Brown: 23-YEAR-OLD PETE LEO
WALKER, WHO TOLD US HE WAS FIRST
INTO HIP HOP BREAK DANCING IN
HIS NATIVE BROOKLYN BEFORE
TAKING UP BALLET, SAYS THAT
McBRIDE AND BONNEFOUX ARE MODELS
IN ANOTHER WAY AS WELL FOR HIM
AND ANNA WHO ARE PARTNER BOTH
ONSTAGE AND, YES, OFF AS WELL.
>> THEY'RE VERY CARING FOR ONE
ANOTHER, YOU KNOW, JEAN-PIERRE
WILL STILL PUT AN UMBRELLA OVER
HER HEAD IF IT'S RAINING
OUTSIDE.
I THINK IS VERY BENEFICIAL FOR
US TO KIND OF SEE THE MATURITY
IN THEIR RELATIONSHIP.
THEY HAVE AN INCREDIBLE
CHEMISTRY.
>> Brown: FOR HER PART, McBRIDE,
A MOTHER OF TWO, NOW A
GRANDMOTHER OF THREE, SAYS SHE'S
ENJOYED THE TRANSITION FROM
DANCER TO TEACHER THOUGH IN SOME
WAYS FINDS IT EVEN MORE NERVE-
WRACKING THAN BEING ON THE
WORLD'S GRAND STAGES AS A
DANCER.
>> BEING A DANCER IS EASY
BECAUSE YOU JUST HAVE YOURSELF
TO THINK ABOUT, YOU KNOW, IT'S
ALL THE GLORY, AND IT'S FOR YOU,
AND WHEN YOU'RE A TEACHER YOU
HAVE SO MANY CONCERNS FOR YOUR
STUDENTS, AND I THINK I'M MORE
NERVOUS WHEN I DO A PERFORMANCE
FOR MY STUDENTS OR FOR THE
COMPANY MEMBERS.
WHEN I STAGE SOMETHING I GET
MORE NERVOUS FOR THEM BECAUSE I
WANT THEM TO FEEL REALLY GOOD
ABOUT THEMSELVES.
>> Brown: IN ADDITION TO
PERFORMANCES, THE COMPANY HAS AN
ACADEMY THAT OFFERS CLASSES FOR
ADULTS AND CHILDREN.
INCLUDING A SO-CALLED REACH
PROGRAM THAT PROVIDES
SCHOLARSHIPS TO LOWER-INCOME
YOUTH.
IT ALSO HOSTS CHARLOTTE BALLET
TWO, FEATURING YOUNGER DANCERS
WHO PERFORM IN LOCAL SCHOOLS.
WE WENT ALONG TO A MORNING
PERFORMANCE FOR ELEMENTARY
SCHOOL CHILDREN IN KANNAPOLIS,
NORTH CAROLINA.
AND WHEN VOLUNTEERS WERE NEEDED
TO COME ONSTAGE TO DANCE, THIS
WAS NOT A SHY BUNCH.
EXTERIOR, PUSH IN ON NAMES
STREET OR SKYLINE SCENES
THREE YEARS AGO THE COMPANY
MOVED INTO A NEW BUILDING, NAMED
FOR ITS TWO LEADERS.
AND THIS YEAR IT CHANGED ITS
NAMED FROM NORTH CAROLINA DANCE
THEATER TO CHARLOTTE BALLET,
REFLECTING ITS FOCUS AND, MORE
IMPORTANTLY, ITS ATTACHMENT TO
THIS RAPIDLY GROWING CITY.
BOTH TICKET SALES AND DONOR
GIFTS ARE UP DRAMATICALLY IN
RECENT YEARS.
AS ARTISTIC DIRECTOR, JEAN-
PIERRE BONNEFOUX SAYS THERE ARE
PLENTY OF CHALLENGES BUT ALSO
PLENTY OF PLEASURES:
>> THERE'S REALLY EXCEPTIONAL
CHOREOGRAPHERS AND THERE'S
EXCEPTIONAL DANCERS.
SO IT'S A GOOD TIME IN AMERICA
TO SEE DANCE.
IT'S LIKE ANYTHING, DANCE CAN
ALSO BE VERY BORING.
BUT WHEN IT'S GOOD AND WHEN
PEOPLE ARE COMMITTED TO THAT, IT
CAN BE SENSATIONAL.
>> Brown: LITTLE BALLERINAS
SCAMPERING NEAR THE SIGN THESE
DAYS, BANNERS REFLECT THE PRIDE
IN THE UPCOMING HONOR FOR
McBRIDE A CELEBRATION OF HER
LIFE'S WORK.
>> I WAS ASTONISHED, AND MOVED,
AND IT'S SUCH A WONDERFUL THING,
IT'S BEEN A DREAM, YOU KNOW, AND
IT'S, I DON'T KNOW HOW TO
DESCRIBE IT, IT'S JUST SO
AMAZING.
I NEVER IN A MILLION YEARS WOULD
HAVE THOUGHT THAT THIS WAS GOING
TO HAPPEN TO ME.
>> Brown: McBRIDE SAYS SHE
REMAIN EAGER TO KEEP PASSING ON
HER PASSION FOR MANY YEARS TO
COME.
>> THANK YOU, GOOD JOB.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY,
JOHN BOEHNER SAID PRESIDENT
OBAMA UPON POISON THE WELL IF
HEACS ON IMMIGRATION REFORM
ALONE.
IT MAKES IT MORE LIKELY THE
SUPREME COURT WILL HAVE TO ISSUE
A
>> Ifill: ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE
RIGHT NOW, ARTIST AND ACTIVIST
MARK STRANDQUIST WANTED TO GIVE
PRISONERS A VOICE TO THE OUTSIDE
WORLD, POSTCARDS SO HE SENT
THOUSANDS OF BLANK POSTCARDS TO
INCARCERATED PEOPLE ACROSS THE
COUNTRY WITH THIS REQUEST:
IF YOU COULD CREATE A WINDOW
INTO THESE WALLS, WHAT WOULD YOU
WANT THE WORLD TO SEE?
THE RESULTS MAY SURPRISE YOU. WE
HAVE A GALLERY OF THE POSTCARD
DRAWINGS ON OUR HOMEPAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, pbs.org/newshour.
>> Woodruff: AND AGAIN, TO OUR
HONOR ROLL OF AMERICAN SERVICE
PERSONNEL KILLED IN IRAQ AND THE
AFGHANISTAN CONFLICT.
WE ADD THEM AS THEIR DEATHS ARE
MADE OFFICIAL AND PHOTOGRAPHS
BECOME AVAILABLE.
HERE, IN SILENCE, IS ONE MORE.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON FRIDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT,
DETROIT'S GRAND BARGAIN TO GET
OUT OF BANKRUPTCY.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.